README.md, before:

# meta-cyclonedx

> **:warning: Before proceeding to read the documentation, please verify that
> you are on the correct branch for your Yocto release, as the feature set and
> default configurations may vary!**

`meta-cyclonedx` is a [Yocto](https://www.yoctoproject.org/) meta-layer which
produces [CycloneDX](https://cyclonedx.org/) Software Bill of Materials
(aka [SBOMs](https://www.ntia.gov/SBOM)) from your target root filesystem.

## Features

This layer generates **CycloneDX** compliant SBOMs with the following features:

- Currently, support for CycloneDX specification 1.6 and 1.4
- Support for multiple supported Yocto (LTS) releases.
- Improved package matching against the [NIST NVD](https://nvd.nist.gov/) by
  fixing [CPE](https://nvd.nist.gov/products/cpe) generation process.
- Included [purl](https://github.com/package-url/purl-spec) package URLs.
- Added generation of an additional CycloneDX VEX file which contains
  information on patched and ignored CVEs from within the OpenEmbedded build
  system.
- Component scopes to differentiate between runtime (`required`) and build-time
  (`optional`) dependencies, enabling per-use-case SBOM filtering.
- Include component licenses.
- Added option to reduce the SBOM size by limiting SBOM collection to run-time
  packages ([which might potentially come at some expense](#potentially-missing-packages-after-runtime-filtering))

This repository was originally forked from the
[BG Networks repository](https://github.com/bgnetworks/meta-dependencytrack).

## Installation

To install this meta-layer simply clone the repository into the `sources`
directory, check out the corresponding branch for your Yocto release
(e.g. scarthgap, kirkstone, ...)
and add it to your `build/conf/bblayers.conf` file:

```sh
cd sources
git clone https://github.com/iris-GmbH/meta-cyclonedx.git
cd meta-cyclonedx
git checkout <YOCTO_RELEASE>
```

and in your `bblayers.conf` file:

```sh
BBLAYERS += "${BSPDIR}/sources/meta-cyclonedx"
```

## Configuration

To enable and configure the layer simply inherit the `cyclonedx-export` class
in your `local.conf` file:

```sh
INHERIT += "cyclonedx-export"
```

### CycloneDX Specification Version

By default, meta-cyclonedx generates **CycloneDX 1.4** format SBOMs. If you
prefer to use 1.6, you can configure:

```sh
CYCLONEDX_SPEC_VERSION = "1.6"
```

**Version differences:**

- **1.4**: Legacy format for compatibility with older tools (default)
- **1.6**: Modern format with enhanced metadata and timestamps

### Runtime vs Build-time Packages

By default, meta-cyclonedx will only include run-time packages in the SBOM,
which drastically reduces the number of potentially irrelevant packages.
However, this can lead to valid packages being omitted from the SBOM
(see [here](#potentially-missing-packages-after-runtime-filtering)).

If preferred, you can add the following configuration setting
(e.g in your local.conf), which will cause meta-cyclonedx to include
all build-time packages as well:

```sh
CYCLONEDX_RUNTIME_PACKAGES_ONLY = "0"
```

### Component Scopes

When including both runtime and build-time packages, meta-cyclonedx uses
[CycloneDX component scopes](https://cyclonedx.org/docs/1.6/json/#components_items_scope)
to differentiate between them:

- Runtime packages are marked with `"scope": "required"`
- Build-time only packages are marked with `"scope": "optional"`

This allows tools to filter components based on their use case:

- **CVE matching**: Focus on components with `"scope": "required"`
- **License compliance**: Include all components regardless of scope
- **Supply chain tracking**: Include all components regardless of scope

Component scopes are enabled by default and available in both CycloneDX 1.4 and 1.6
specifications. If you need to disable them (e.g., for compatibility with certain
SBOM profiles or tools):

```sh
CYCLONEDX_ADD_COMPONENT_SCOPES = "0"
```

### Vulnerability Analysis Timestamps

By default, vulnerability analysis records include `firstIssued` and `lastUpdated`
timestamps when using CycloneDX 1.6. To generate minimal VEX documents without timestamps:

```sh
CYCLONEDX_ADD_VULN_TIMESTAMPS = "1"
```

### Component Licenses

By default, component licenses are included in the SBOM.

You may choose to exclude license information from your SBOM:

```sh
CYCLONEDX_ADD_COMPONENT_LICENSES = "0"
```

The licenses data is taken from the component recipe
(see [LICENSE](https://docs.yoctoproject.org/singleindex.html#term-LICENSE).
Single licenses are matched against a list of [known SPDX licenses](/https://github.com/iris-GmbH/meta-cyclonedx/tree/main/meta/files/spdx-license-list-data)
where possible.

If multiple licenses are specified using `&` or `|`, the license is converted
into a [SPDX license expression](https://spdx.github.io/spdx-spec/v2.3/SPDX-license-expressions/#).

Additionally, simple expressions (only containing "AND" operators) are split
into multiple license entries by default, improving the SBOM data quality.
Note however, that this might not be supported by your SBOM consuming tool of
choice (e.g. [DependencyTrack](https://github.com/DependencyTrack/dependency-track/issues/170)).

To disable this feature you can set

```sh
CYCLONEDX_SPLIT_LICENSE_EXPRESSIONS = "0"
```

### Minimal SBOM Configuration

Meta-cyclonedx supports generating a **minimal SBOM** that includes only the essential information required by the CycloneDX specification. This is useful for:

- Reducing SBOM file size
- Compliance with minimal SBOM requirements
- Fast SBOM generation
- Environments with strict data minimization policies

#### What's Included in a Minimal SBOM

The minimal SBOM always contains:

**Component Information:**

- `name` - Component name
- `version` - Component version
- `type` - Component type (typically "library")
- `bom-ref` - Unique reference identifier

**Identifiers:**

- `cpe` - Common Platform Enumeration for vulnerability matching
- `purl` - Package URL for package identification

**Relationships:**

- `dependencies` - Component dependency graph

**Metadata:**

- `bomFormat`, `specVersion`, `serialNumber`, `version`
- `timestamp` - SBOM generation time
- `tools` - SBOM generation tool information

**VEX (Vulnerability Exploitability Exchange):**

- `vulnerabilities` - CVE status information (patched/ignored)

#### Minimal Configuration Example

To generate a minimal SBOM, disable all optional features:

```sh
INHERIT += "cyclonedx-export"

# Use minimal configuration
CYCLONEDX_SPEC_VERSION = "1.6"           # or "1.4"
CYCLONEDX_RUNTIME_PACKAGES_ONLY = "1"    # Runtime packages only
CYCLONEDX_ADD_COMPONENT_SCOPES = "0"     # Disable scope marking
CYCLONEDX_ADD_VULN_TIMESTAMPS = "0"      # Disable VEX timestamps
CYCLONEDX_ADD_COMPONENT_LICENSES = "0"   # Exclude licenses
```

This produces the smallest valid CycloneDX SBOM with only essential vulnerability and package information.

### Advanced Configuration Summary

```sh
# Specification version (default: "1.4")
CYCLONEDX_SPEC_VERSION = "1.4"  # or "1.6"

# Include build-time packages (default: "1" = runtime only)
CYCLONEDX_RUNTIME_PACKAGES_ONLY = "1"

# Add component scopes (default: "1")
CYCLONEDX_ADD_COMPONENT_SCOPES = "1"

# Add vulnerability timestamps in 1.6 (default: "1")
CYCLONEDX_ADD_VULN_TIMESTAMPS = "1"

# Add component licenses (default: "1")
CYCLONEDX_ADD_COMPONENT_LICENSES = "1"

# split license expressions into multiple license entries
# when possible (default: "1")
CYCLONEDX_SPLIT_LICENSE_EXPRESSIONS = "1"
```

## Usage

Once everything is configured simply build your image as you normally would.
By default the final CycloneDX SBOMs are saved to the folder
`${DEPLOY_DIR}/${PN}/cyclonedx-export` as `bom.json` and `vex.json`
respectively.

## Uploading to DependencyTrack (tested against DT v4.11.4)

While this layer does not offer a direct integration with DependencyTrack
(we consider that a feature, since it removes dependencies to external
infrastructure in your build),
it is perfectly possible to use the produced SBOMs within DependencyTrack.

At the time of writing DependencyTrack does not support uploading component
and vulnerability information in one go (which is why we currently create a
separate `vex.json` file). The status on supporting this may be tracked
[here](https://github.com/DependencyTrack/dependency-track/issues/919).

### Manual Upload

1. Go into an existing project in your DependencyTrack instance or create a new
   one.
2. Go to the _Components_ tab and click _Upload BOM_.
3. Select the `bom.json` file from your deploy directory.
4. Wait for the vulnerability analysis to complete.
5. Go to the _Audit Vulnerabilities_ tab and click _Apply VEX_.
6. Select the `vex.json` file from your deploy directory.

### Automated Upload

You may want to script the upload of the SBOM files to DependencyTrack,
e.g. as part of a CI job that runs after your build is complete.

This is possible by leveraging DependencyTracks REST API.

At the time of writing this can be done by leveraging the following API
endpoints:

1. `/v1/bom` for uploading the `bom.json`.
2. `/v1/event/token/{uuid}` for checking the status on the `bom.json`
   processing.
3. `/v1/vex` for uploading the `vex.json`.

Please refer to [DependencyTracks REST API documentation](https://docs.dependencytrack.org/integrations/rest-api/)
regarding the usage of these endpoints as well as the required token
permissions.

In the future we might include an example script in this repository.

## Known Limitations

### Potentially Missing Packages After Run-time Filtering

We use the `image_list_installed_packages` function from upstream
OpenEmbedded as a means to reduce the SBOM contents to packages that are added
to the final resulting rootfs. This drastically reduces the "noise" generated
by CVEs in build-time dependencies. This however comes with some potential
downsides (i.e. Missing some packages), as discussed
[here](https://github.com/savoirfairelinux/meta-cyclonedx/issues/9#issue-2494183505).

### Missing Dependencies with Modern Programming Languages

OpenEmbedded and its core mechanisms work best with "traditional" programming
languages such as C and C++, as these are the languages that they were initially
designed around. For instance, a core-assumption prevalent in many OE mechanisms
(including those we depend on in meta-cyclonedx) is that each library is
described in its own OE recipe. This however does not work well with many
modern programming languages, which often come with their own package managers
(e.g. NPM, Cargo, Go Modules, ...), which do not necessarily integrate well
into the OpenEmbedded ecosystem and depend of potentially hundreds of external
dependencies (good luck writing a separate OE recipe for each dependency in a
small-medium sized Node.js project).

Thus, if you rely on packages written in programming languages that come with
their own package managers, you might be better off with a divide and
conquer approach for covering their packages as well (your mileage may vary):

1. Use this meta-layer to generate a CycloneDX SBOM which covers your OE-based
   operating system, system libraries, etc.
2. Use tools designed explicitly for generating CycloneDX SBOMs for these
   languages (e.g. [Rust](https://github.com/CycloneDX/cyclonedx-rust-cargo),
   [NPM](https://github.com/CycloneDX/cyclonedx-node-npm),
   [Golang](https://github.com/CycloneDX/cyclonedx-gomod), ...)
3. Optionally, use some glue code to merge the SBOMs together
   ([cyclonedx-cli](https://github.com/CycloneDX/cyclonedx-cli) offers merge
   functionality)

Commit message:

feat: add feature to export unpatched vulnerabilities to VEX
This commit adds support for exporting unpatched vulnerabilities as
supplied by cve-check. This feature is particularly useful for automated
vulnerability triaging.

To this end, two variables are introduced:
- CYCLONEDX_INCLUDE_UNPATCHED_VULNS: By default, this variable is set to
  0, disabling the export of unpatched vulnerabilities. The default
  ensures that this feature does not change the behavior of the layer.
  When set to 1, the cve-check.bbclass from Poky is inherited, so that
  the functionality from that class can be reused to fetch unpatched
  vulnerabilities from the NVD. These vulnerabilities are then appended
  to the VEX output.
- CYCLONEDX_UNPATCHED_VULNS_STATE: By default, this variable is set to
  in_triage. This enables the customization of the state field of the
  vulnerability analysis object in the VEX to match the vulnerability
  management process.

Backported to scarthgap

Signed-off-by: Jasper Orschulko <jasper@fancydomain.eu>

README.md, after:

# meta-cyclonedx

> **:warning: Before proceeding to read the documentation, please verify that
> you are on the correct branch for your Yocto release, as the feature set and
> default configurations may vary!**

`meta-cyclonedx` is a [Yocto](https://www.yoctoproject.org/) meta-layer which
produces [CycloneDX](https://cyclonedx.org/) Software Bill of Materials
(aka [SBOMs](https://www.ntia.gov/SBOM)) from your target root filesystem.

## Features

This layer generates **CycloneDX** compliant SBOMs with the following features:

- Currently, support for CycloneDX specification 1.6 and 1.4
- Support for multiple supported Yocto (LTS) releases.
- Improved package matching against the [NIST NVD](https://nvd.nist.gov/) by
  fixing [CPE](https://nvd.nist.gov/products/cpe) generation process.
- Included [purl](https://github.com/package-url/purl-spec) package URLs.
- Added generation of an additional CycloneDX VEX file which contains
  information on patched and ignored CVEs from within the OpenEmbedded build
  system.
- Component scopes to differentiate between runtime (`required`) and build-time
  (`optional`) dependencies, enabling per-use-case SBOM filtering.
- Include component licenses.
- Added option to reduce the SBOM size by limiting SBOM collection to run-time
  packages ([which might potentially come at some expense](#potentially-missing-packages-after-runtime-filtering))

This repository was originally forked from the
[BG Networks repository](https://github.com/bgnetworks/meta-dependencytrack).

## Installation

To install this meta-layer simply clone the repository into the `sources`
directory, check out the corresponding branch for your Yocto release
(e.g. scarthgap, kirkstone, ...)
and add it to your `build/conf/bblayers.conf` file:

```sh
cd sources
git clone https://github.com/iris-GmbH/meta-cyclonedx.git
cd meta-cyclonedx
git checkout <YOCTO_RELEASE>
```

and in your `bblayers.conf` file:

```sh
BBLAYERS += "${BSPDIR}/sources/meta-cyclonedx"
```

## Configuration

To enable and configure the layer simply inherit the `cyclonedx-export` class
in your `local.conf` file:

```sh
INHERIT += "cyclonedx-export"
```

### CycloneDX Specification Version

By default, meta-cyclonedx generates **CycloneDX 1.4** format SBOMs. If you
prefer to use 1.6, you can configure:

```sh
CYCLONEDX_SPEC_VERSION = "1.6"
```

**Version differences:**

- **1.4**: Legacy format for compatibility with older tools (default)
- **1.6**: Modern format with enhanced metadata and timestamps

### Runtime vs Build-time Packages

By default, meta-cyclonedx will only include run-time packages in the SBOM,
which drastically reduces the number of potentially irrelevant packages.
However, this can lead to valid packages being omitted from the SBOM
(see [here](#potentially-missing-packages-after-runtime-filtering)).

If preferred, you can add the following configuration setting
(e.g in your local.conf), which will cause meta-cyclonedx to include
all build-time packages as well:

```sh
CYCLONEDX_RUNTIME_PACKAGES_ONLY = "0"
```

### Component Scopes

When including both runtime and build-time packages, meta-cyclonedx uses
[CycloneDX component scopes](https://cyclonedx.org/docs/1.6/json/#components_items_scope)
to differentiate between them:

- Runtime packages are marked with `"scope": "required"`
- Build-time only packages are marked with `"scope": "optional"`

This allows tools to filter components based on their use case:

- **CVE matching**: Focus on components with `"scope": "required"`
- **License compliance**: Include all components regardless of scope
- **Supply chain tracking**: Include all components regardless of scope

Component scopes are enabled by default and available in both CycloneDX 1.4 and 1.6
specifications. If you need to disable them (e.g., for compatibility with certain
SBOM profiles or tools):

```sh
CYCLONEDX_ADD_COMPONENT_SCOPES = "0"
```

### Vulnerability Analysis Timestamps

By default, vulnerability analysis records include `firstIssued` and `lastUpdated`
timestamps when using CycloneDX 1.6. To generate minimal VEX documents without timestamps:

```sh
CYCLONEDX_ADD_VULN_TIMESTAMPS = "1"
```

### Component Licenses

By default, component licenses are included in the SBOM.

You may choose to exclude license information from your SBOM:

```sh
CYCLONEDX_ADD_COMPONENT_LICENSES = "0"
```

The licenses data is taken from the component recipe
(see [LICENSE](https://docs.yoctoproject.org/singleindex.html#term-LICENSE).
Single licenses are matched against a list of [known SPDX licenses](/https://github.com/iris-GmbH/meta-cyclonedx/tree/main/meta/files/spdx-license-list-data)
where possible.

If multiple licenses are specified using `&` or `|`, the license is converted
into a [SPDX license expression](https://spdx.github.io/spdx-spec/v2.3/SPDX-license-expressions/#).

Additionally, simple expressions (only containing "AND" operators) are split
into multiple license entries by default, improving the SBOM data quality.
Note however, that this might not be supported by your SBOM consuming tool of
choice (e.g. [DependencyTrack](https://github.com/DependencyTrack/dependency-track/issues/170)).

To disable this feature you can set

```sh
CYCLONEDX_SPLIT_LICENSE_EXPRESSIONS = "0"
```

### Minimal SBOM Configuration

Meta-cyclonedx supports generating a **minimal SBOM** that includes only the essential information required by the CycloneDX specification. This is useful for:

- Reducing SBOM file size
- Compliance with minimal SBOM requirements
- Fast SBOM generation
- Environments with strict data minimization policies

#### What's Included in a Minimal SBOM

The minimal SBOM always contains:

**Component Information:**

- `name` - Component name
- `version` - Component version
- `type` - Component type (typically "library")
- `bom-ref` - Unique reference identifier

**Identifiers:**

- `cpe` - Common Platform Enumeration for vulnerability matching
- `purl` - Package URL for package identification

**Relationships:**

- `dependencies` - Component dependency graph

**Metadata:**

- `bomFormat`, `specVersion`, `serialNumber`, `version`
- `timestamp` - SBOM generation time
- `tools` - SBOM generation tool information

**VEX (Vulnerability Exploitability Exchange):**

- `vulnerabilities` - CVE status information (patched/ignored)

#### Minimal Configuration Example

To generate a minimal SBOM, disable all optional features:

```sh
INHERIT += "cyclonedx-export"

# Use minimal configuration
CYCLONEDX_SPEC_VERSION = "1.6"           # or "1.4"
CYCLONEDX_RUNTIME_PACKAGES_ONLY = "1"    # Runtime packages only
CYCLONEDX_ADD_COMPONENT_SCOPES = "0"     # Disable scope marking
CYCLONEDX_ADD_VULN_TIMESTAMPS = "0"      # Disable VEX timestamps
CYCLONEDX_ADD_COMPONENT_LICENSES = "0"   # Exclude licenses
```

This produces the smallest valid CycloneDX SBOM with only essential vulnerability and package information.

### Advanced Configuration Summary

```sh
# Specification version (default: "1.4")
CYCLONEDX_SPEC_VERSION = "1.4"  # or "1.6"

# Include build-time packages (default: "1" = runtime only)
CYCLONEDX_RUNTIME_PACKAGES_ONLY = "1"

# Add component scopes (default: "1")
CYCLONEDX_ADD_COMPONENT_SCOPES = "1"

# Add vulnerability timestamps in 1.6 (default: "1")
CYCLONEDX_ADD_VULN_TIMESTAMPS = "1"

# Add component licenses (default: "1")
CYCLONEDX_ADD_COMPONENT_LICENSES = "1"

# split license expressions into multiple license entries
# when possible (default: "1")
CYCLONEDX_SPLIT_LICENSE_EXPRESSIONS = "1"

# Include unpatched vulnerabilities in VEX (default: "0").
# If enabled, the cve-check class is inherited to query the NVD.
# Note that querying the NVD happens at the time of running the
# task, which currently requires rootfs generation. You may
# want to use external tools such as DependencyTrack for regular analysis.
CYCLONEDX_INCLUDE_UNPATCHED_VULNS = "1"

# State to assign to unpatched vulnerabilities (default: "in_triage").
# Can be empty to omit the state field.
CYCLONEDX_UNPATCHED_VULNS_STATE = "in_triage"
```

## Usage

Once everything is configured simply build your image as you normally would.
By default the final CycloneDX SBOMs are saved to the folder
`${DEPLOY_DIR}/${PN}/cyclonedx-export` as `bom.json` and `vex.json`
respectively.

## Uploading to DependencyTrack (tested against DT v4.11.4)

While this layer does not offer a direct integration with DependencyTrack
(we consider that a feature, since it removes dependencies to external
infrastructure in your build),
it is perfectly possible to use the produced SBOMs within DependencyTrack.

At the time of writing DependencyTrack does not support uploading component
and vulnerability information in one go (which is why we currently create a
separate `vex.json` file). The status on supporting this may be tracked
[here](https://github.com/DependencyTrack/dependency-track/issues/919).

### Manual Upload

1. Go into an existing project in your DependencyTrack instance or create a new
   one.
2. Go to the _Components_ tab and click _Upload BOM_.
3. Select the `bom.json` file from your deploy directory.
4. Wait for the vulnerability analysis to complete.
5. Go to the _Audit Vulnerabilities_ tab and click _Apply VEX_.
6. Select the `vex.json` file from your deploy directory.

### Automated Upload

You may want to script the upload of the SBOM files to DependencyTrack,
e.g. as part of a CI job that runs after your build is complete.

This is possible by leveraging DependencyTracks REST API.

At the time of writing this can be done by leveraging the following API
endpoints:

1. `/v1/bom` for uploading the `bom.json`.
2. `/v1/event/token/{uuid}` for checking the status on the `bom.json`
   processing.
3. `/v1/vex` for uploading the `vex.json`.

Please refer to [DependencyTracks REST API documentation](https://docs.dependencytrack.org/integrations/rest-api/)
regarding the usage of these endpoints as well as the required token
permissions.

In the future we might include an example script in this repository.

## Known Limitations

### Potentially Missing Packages After Run-time Filtering

We use the `image_list_installed_packages` function from upstream
OpenEmbedded as a means to reduce the SBOM contents to packages that are added
to the final resulting rootfs. This drastically reduces the "noise" generated
by CVEs in build-time dependencies. This however comes with some potential
downsides (i.e. Missing some packages), as discussed
[here](https://github.com/savoirfairelinux/meta-cyclonedx/issues/9#issue-2494183505).

### Missing Dependencies with Modern Programming Languages

OpenEmbedded and its core mechanisms work best with "traditional" programming
languages such as C and C++, as these are the languages that they were initially
designed around. For instance, a core-assumption prevalent in many OE mechanisms
(including those we depend on in meta-cyclonedx) is that each library is
described in its own OE recipe. This however does not work well with many
modern programming languages, which often come with their own package managers
(e.g. NPM, Cargo, Go Modules, ...), which do not necessarily integrate well
into the OpenEmbedded ecosystem and depend of potentially hundreds of external
dependencies (good luck writing a separate OE recipe for each dependency in a
small-medium sized Node.js project).

Thus, if you rely on packages written in programming languages that come with
their own package managers, you might be better off with a divide and
conquer approach for covering their packages as well (your mileage may vary):

1. Use this meta-layer to generate a CycloneDX SBOM which covers your OE-based
   operating system, system libraries, etc.
2. Use tools designed explicitly for generating CycloneDX SBOMs for these
   languages (e.g. [Rust](https://github.com/CycloneDX/cyclonedx-rust-cargo),
   [NPM](https://github.com/CycloneDX/cyclonedx-node-npm),
   [Golang](https://github.com/CycloneDX/cyclonedx-gomod), ...)
3. Optionally, use some glue code to merge the SBOMs together
   ([cyclonedx-cli](https://github.com/CycloneDX/cyclonedx-cli) offers merge
   functionality)
